like my actual life is way less
contentious than my online life
you know they're not even in the same
universe in some sense is that sense of
polarization
it it's really very difficult to tell
now in the modern world how much of that
is a mere consequence
and a mere appearance of virtualization
and how much it actually reflects some
fundamental disquiet I mean I know they
Loop but we have no way of really
knowing and if it is true that
virtualization enables psychopathy then
that's a that's a real that's a real
conundrum that's a real tough nut to
crack in a way you're getting closer to
what people are really like uh in an
anonymous responses we know that from
questionnaire work
that the more Anonymous response is the
the less desirable the answers that you
get from people are
but it's yeah it does sound very cynical
to think that
the nasty stuff you see online is really
The Human Condition
[Music]
foreign
watching on YouTube and Associated or
listening on Associated podcasts
um I'm here today talking to a colleague
and uh compatriot of mine Dr Dale paulus
from the University of British Columbia
he's a personality researcher whose work
in so-called dark personality traits via
a variety of measurement methods has
yielded measures of the dark tetrad
psychopathy narcissism machiavellianism
and last but not least sadism his work
has also validated measures of socially
desirable responding perceived control
Free Will and determinism and over
claiming his work has been published in
over 150 articles in books
and his current citation count which is
the number of times other scientists
have referred to his work and the
Cardinal marker I would say of of
eminence and influence among scientists
exceeds 43 000.
so um Dr paulos is definitely one of the
world's most outstanding
psychometric personality psychologists
that is personality psychologists who
specify who specialize in the field of
of mathematical measurement of of
Behavioral and conceptual traits
hi hi Dale it's good to see you
um I I want to let everybody who's
watching and listening know uh Dr paulus
from the University of British Columbia
is a researcher and personality as his
bio indicated uh our work in some ways
ran in parallel methodologically I was
very interested for years in
statistical analysis of linguistic
description descriptions of personality
I concentrated mostly on
um trying to
further develop the idea of the Big Five
on the statistical front the five Factor
personality model extroversion
neuroticism agreeableness
conscientiousness and openness
um Dr paulus took a turn that was very
interesting to me though as well he's
spent a number of decades studying
what what came to be known as the dark
Triad and later the dark tetrad
originally when the Corpus of adjectives
was generated to extract out a
five-dimensional description of
personality from language
um
judgmental adjectives
were eliminated from the Corpus the idea
was to produce a set of descriptors of
normative and non-pathological
personality independent some sense of
morality and there was some utility in
that I think because it gave us a
picture of
normative personality but the downside
was we didn't develop as detailed an
understanding as we might have of the
dark side of personality and that seems
to be where your work which is which is
receiving increased public attention I
would say perhaps in the in the days of
of Internet misbehavior that's where
your research really came into its own
is that a reasonable
initial summary yeah good summary
so do you want to start by explaining to
people let's walk through your your
research on the dark Triad how did you
become interested in this and and how
did you develop the measurement
instruments and what do you measure
or like a lot of academics my research
can be traced back to my advisor
who was Richard Christie the
inventor of machiavellianism as a trait
and he did something very clever he went
into the books of Nicolo Machiavelli
who's an advisor to politicians way back
when
and
he took the statements administered them
to
undergraduate students and simply asked
them how much do you agree with these
statements like
you have to get to know important people
always be prepared for the worst in
people
and the amazing thing was the huge
variants in the responses
and that's what personality research is
all about we look for
and wallowin relish the fact that people
give different answers
and apparently
a lot of people agreed totally with the
statements that Machiavelli made and
the 1500s others were horrified by them
and so that inspired Richard Christie to
make a questionnaire
the Mac 4 the most popular version of
this questionnaires was administered to
subject pools
at his university Columbia University
and elsewhere and it wasn't just
self-reports it predicted actual
Behavior so he could show that people
who scored high on the Mach 4
manipulated others in a room in a
laboratory so they would try to squeeze
money out of other people by tricking
them and all of this could be recorded
and published
hence
Richard Christie is forever associated
with machiavellianism so I
I was
I I thought that was a fabulous way to
do research
I moved on then and took a real job at
the University of British Columbia and
met up there with bob hair sort of the
the Emperor of research on psychopathy
another averse of trait
and of course he has done it all
but what he didn't do was compare it to
machiavellianism
and I've also done some research
separately
uh narcissism which captured attention
of researchers in the 1980s
because
it seems to resonate everybody knows
narcissists people who want a lot of
attention and think they are superior to
everyone else
everyone can resonate to knowing such
people
so we have three personality variables
then when the student Kevin Williams
came along
and typically in my career I go with
what the students want to do
we decided to
figure out whether there were more are
there more
aversive personalities
so we searched the literature and we did
as much as we could back then
early 2000s to cover all the literature
and see if there were more
personalities that
that were at the level of narcissism
machiavellianism and psychopathy
we called them the dark Triad because
they seem to dominate the literature
they're already hundreds of studies on
each one of those
the unfortunate results
fortunate in the long run I suppose is
that the literature is overlapped
so much you could barely tell the
difference if you took all the
literature on narcissism all the
literature and machiavellianism
and psychopathy you could see the same
things coming up
and that was the original problem we
want to parse the Dark Side of traits
but you can't really do much with the
literature because
of this phenomenon that we called
construct creep and that is a researcher
it doesn't
have the ability to research everything
at once so they focus on one variable
but it creeps wider and wider until it
overlaps with other variables
and that's a problem because you don't
know which one you're actually studying
when you put it into a research program
which one is responsible for the action
you're seeing right right well we won't
we want to talk about that in some more
detail too because I'd like to find out
a bit more about how you feel I know
that the dark Triad is morphed into the
dark tetrad to some degree and I'm also
curious as to what you have to say about
the overlap between the dark tetrad
qualities and and personality disorder
categories especially in the uh
histrionic anti-social and narcissistic
categories obviously that Shades into
personality pathology and so can I can I
define the the three traits and have you
correct my definitions if you would so
the machiavellians as you pointed out
Machiavelli was a an advisor to princes
who was really interested in some sense
in the outright maintenance of
instrumental power I wouldn't say he was
driven by any intrinsic ethic it was
Machiavelli gave advices to printers who
wanted to maintain their position
um by by hook or by crook let's say so
Machiavellian are willing to use
manipulation to obtain their personal
ends and narcissists seem to be driven
by a high desire to
um to obtain unearned status from others
and the most important thing for them is
not status in relationship to competence
let's say or in relationship to
Performance but just in status for its
own sake and then the Psychopaths I
spent a lot of time looking at hairs
research and thinking about relationship
to the big five
Psychopaths seem to be something
approximating parasitical Paris or
parasitical predators and so they're
very very low in agreeableness and that
makes them callous and non-empathetic
and then they also seem to be very low
in conscientiousness that seems to
Accord reasonably well with the two
factors of the psychopathy scale and so
a real psychopath is someone who is
willing to take what you have let's say
and use it and that might be the
predatory aspect and also to live off
the earnings and and efforts of others
and that's also an element of criminal
behavior and so you're looking at the
Nexus of all three of those
machiavellianism narcissism and
psychopathy and recently you and other
researchers have added I think this is
so interesting because I think it was a
real lack you you you added sadism to
that which is positive delight and
pleasure taken in the suffering of
others
so is can you expand it all upon the
definitions of machiavellianism
narcissism and psychopathy and we could
segue into sadism
yeah I agree with all of your
definitions although what we did was
spend a lot of time trying to find
what's different
among each of the characters
and what the overlap is why is it that
the literatures and the measures that
were available
always overlapped
to a dangerous degree
in trying to understand what's going on
so the key thing for psychopaths
in our opinion is impulsivity and uh
sensation seeking which which is what
gets them into trouble they may not have
worse motives than the others but they
can't help it that's why they at the
extreme levels spend their lives in
prison
they can't help
um responding to Temptation whatever the
Temptation is they go for it and often
they get what they want right away and
they keep on doing it until they get
caught
and they don't seem to learn from it so
that answers just a qualification to the
definition of psychopath now what's
underlying it we think is callousness
for all of them they're overlapping
because at the core is a a failure to
have empathy
and if you have a deficit in empathy
you it seems inevitable that you're
going to exploit other people in one way
or another because you're not you're not
getting the feedback that people with
empathy get in seeing other people
suffer at your hands
and the story of sadism is a is quite a
long story but uh as you want me to get
into the details sure yeah yeah please
do please do
yeah I don't know whether I'm more
sensitive to these things than other
people but then I started seeing sadism
in irregular people
and not only is it there and everybody
people but people seem to wallow in it
when the circumstances will allow it for
example violent Sports
uh one of my favorite sports hockey
it's kind of pathetic watching a hockey
game the cheers are larger larger for
the fights
than for the goals
people love to see their fighter Pummel
the fighter of the other team or Pummel
anyone
and the cheers that go up in a hockey
Stadium are incredible
and the cheers only stop when the victim
falls to the ice and starts twitching
and a hush follows
over the crowd showing the Dual nature
of
positive and negative motivations that
human beings have
but the fact that they love seeing the
fighting no matter how much blood is and
teeth
end up on the ice uh is is disappointing
in a way and we learned a long time ago
from the Europeans
they don't have to do that to make happy
hakia
a wonderful sport that was just one but
then watching the undergraduate students
at UBC University of British Columbia
what are they doing for fun
well if you'll recall Way Way Back
they used to play these archive games
and there was some gentle ones Pac-Man
asteroids I don't know if you remember
those but
uh going down into the arcade you see
that people are gathered around one of
the arcade games
and so I wandered over to see it and it
was something called Mortal Kombat
which by today's standards isn't that
bad but the heads
are torn off and the blood spurts out
and that's why that crowd was there
because it was so much more appealing
than the silly little Mario Brothers
stuff
and it just struck me as
the beginning of my interest in what
people do especially young males
when they have time on their own
so it's not porn then it seems like it's
violence and
it's somewhat horrifying
but it's gotten worse I don't know if
you've been following the video games
that are now available on your home
computer you don't need to go to an
arcade and be embarrassed by what you're
playing because you can sit at home and
and play whatever games you want and so
now
uh what's it called a Grand Theft Auto
you can kill innocent bystanders step on
their heads
Etc and there are actual torture sites
where you can go and torture people
you can torture animals
it's all there and
so people are paying to do this stuff
they pay for violent Sports they pay for
violent movies what's the most popular
television program these days
it's called Game of Thrones and it's the
most sadistic kind of
television program that you've ever seen
people are paying for this in one way or
another and they're attracted to it they
relay stories with their friends so this
putting this picture together suggested
to me that some not all in fact the
variance again is there which excites a
personality researcher some people are
highly attracted to this stuff
other people are horrified
Black Rifle coffee company is on a
mission to build a support network for
veterans First Responders and law
enforcement by serving you the best
coffee you've ever had thanks to your
support that dream has become a reality
this year alone Black Rifle coffee
donated over 120 000 bags of coffee to
Veterans and First Responders while
expanding their own team of active duty
service members veterans and Veteran
family members if you want to continue
supporting this incredible company go to
Black riflecoffee.com and use promo code
Jordan at checkout for 10 off your
purchase and your first coffee Club
order Black Rifle coffee is roasted by a
veteran-led team of expert coffee
graders here in the U.S and remember
it's your support that gets gear funding
and supplies into the hands of those on
our front lines the producers of the
show myself included love Black Rifle
coffee and find it the perfect go-to for
the morning commute to work as well as
work itself Black Rifle coffee gives us
the Boost we need expertly mixing Bold
Flavor and that much needed kick of
caffeine so go to blackriflecoffee.com
and use promo code Jordan for 10 off you
can also find Black Rifle coffee in
grocery and convenience stores near you
Black Rifle coffee America's coffee and
our preferred blend to enjoy alongside
the Jordan B Peterson podcast
I know that neurophysiologically
anger is a multi-dimensional emotion it
activates positive emotion systems and
negative emotion systems simultaneously
and so you can think about that perhaps
as the core element of something like
aggression at least maybe both defensive
and predatory aggression and then you
could imagine that people are wired
differently as individuals so that for
any given person being angry might be
associated with a predominance of of
approach motivation right positive
emotion and a relative decrement of
negative emotion for other people that
would be reversed like I'm trying to
account for what the positive pleasure
is in the observation or participation
in the aggression I mean you could
associate it with hypothetically you
could associate it actually with
predatory behavior with hunting and with
combat
but it also might be a consequence of
differential wiring at the neurological
level in relationship to the balance
between positive and negative emotion
experienced by having any given person
with anger
no because I you see this variation in
people you know I mean I know some
people who are real fighters let's say
on the political front and some of them
really enjoy a good scrap right it
really seems to get them
motivated and this isn't a criticism of
them necessarily and then other people
and I think I fall more into this cap
I'm not really very interested at all in
in Conflict it bothers me a lot although
I don't like delayed conflict so I'm
likely to engage in it you know
relatively up front but so we could go
into that like what do you think what do
you think is the fundamental biological
and then also ethical difference between
people who are taking positive Delight
in aggression and those who aren't and
uh
and
well I guess we could start with those
questions
yeah that's the fundamental
query a puzzle in a way why would human
beings
have to have a sadistic side at least
some people and as you mentioned
predatory very often so one can
speculate that it helps
adult animals
carnivores especially hunt if they know
not only are willing but enjoy The
Killing
and that could have been carried over to
human beings
[Music]
also a little more instrumental
explanation would be that
it helps dominance that is if you can
scare off
your competitors
whether they're uh competitors for maids
or for territory
than being sadistic about it that would
be a niche theory in some sense I guess
is that I I know that the worldwide
prevalence of psychopathy ranges between
one and five percent hovers around three
and what it seems to indicate because
it's relatively stable is that although
being a psychopath isn't a particularly
successful strategy in that 97 percent
of people don't take that route in a
Cooperative Society a niche does open up
for people who are willing to use
manipulation and impulsive behavior and
sadism to dominate and use power
oppressively to at least what would you
say carve out for themselves some degree
of success and then now and then some
spectacular success I suppose which
would be the case with people who are
extraordinarily successful at being
tyrants and so so you so we have two
arguments there in some sense one is
like a neurobiological difference in
response to the balance of positive and
negative emotion in anger and the other
one is well there's a niche that opens
up for people who are really willing to
use power and manipulation and so forth
to attain the rewards of social
dominance and Psychopaths seem to do
that right because they'll manipulate
they often have to move from place to
place because people figure them out but
they will use short-term dominant
strategies I think you've related that
too as well the dark Triad to to
short-term mating strategies as well
right
which is an interest that's another
thing that we could concentrate on right
on what the dark Triad predicts the dark
tetrad interested me particularly
because the literature I read on
Psychopaths did describe them as
impulsive so they're willing even to
sacrifice their own Futures to the
pleasure of the moment but there was
obviously a subset of psychopaths who
delighted in being cruel and the
standard explanation of callousness say
which is merely lack of empathy didn't
seem to be enough right because it isn't
merely that people are lacking empathic
empathy it's that sometimes there are
people who take a positive Delight in
cruelty and that there's a new term
that's used to describe online mobbing
Behavior or bullying Behavior troll
Behavior which is lulls right I just did
it for the lulls which is the plural of
LOL laugh out loud and to do it for the
lulls is to go after someone on the net
often anonymously merely for the purpose
of making them miserable and wretched
and put them in pain just so that you
can enjoy that and certainly That's Not
Mere psychopathy right that's not mere
impulsiveness there's there's an
additional component that's worth
concentrating on
all right so you covered a lot of ground
there uh
uh picking up on the argument for
psychopaths being impulsive
uh just to remind
viewers who are not that familiar with
evolutionary theory the simple argument
is you got to get mates
to maintain your your genes in in the
gene pool and there are many ways of
doing that right one is to grab and and
run with whatever you want using Force
if necessary that will sometimes get you
mates more strategic
uh machiavellians find ways of
manipulating others to uh to get their
genes into the gene pool narcissists
seem to attract
mates partly because of their confidence
even if it is over confidence
say this is a little harder to see
why would being sadistic get you
romantic and sexual partners well I
think I touched on the only explanation
that
uh I could think of and I think you
mentioned it too and that is
well you scare off your competitors
and you even scare off your mate into
doing what you want by hurting them and
in a very public way
so you're deterring uh you're deterring
reactions from other people and that may
be of benefit in some circumstances and
then you you went into the the niche
Theory or niche as some people say
um yeah there's a lot of niches out
there for dark personalities each one
may require very select kinds of traits
but uh if you want a job as an enforcer
on a hockey team you better damn well be
able to and willing to and like to hurt
other people you know it also might be
so I I know someone quite well so I
talked to him he he was often hired by
corporations to fire people
and he's a very disagreeable person but
he's very high in conscientiousness eh
so
um I was talking to him at one point in
my lab because I was struggling with a
few students and who I eventually let go
and I I really realized that I probably
had kept them in the lab longer than I
should have and that their poor
performance was demotivating some of the
people in my lab who are very high
performers and you know just producing a
decrement in the overall quality of our
work and part of the reason I think I
failed to take action is because I am a
rather agreeable person and I find
firing people that say very distasteful
and so I talked to my associate my
friend about firing people and he said I
enjoy it
and I said that really surprised me and
there's someone I admire and respect
very competent person by the way I said
well why is that he said well
you know I go into corporations and I
ferret out the people who are kissing up
and kicking down I ferret out the
narcissists I figured out the people who
as I alluded to take credit when they
haven't done anything and cast
aspersions on others when they have done
something and who are clearly not doing
their job and then also I go after
people who
for whom it would be better in some real
sense to be off doing something else and
his continual pattern of employment for
multiple years because he was
particularly good at this was he'd go
into a corporation that was failing and
start to fire people at the bottom and
then climb the hierarchy and then when
he got too close to the top they'd fire
him of course but you know it was really
interesting to me because it's also
possible that some of these traits the
more Psychopathic traits have a positive
utility socially even speaking morally
when they're combined with other
personality traits
right but that are particularly like
maybe it's not so bad to be low in
agreeableness if you're high in
conscientiousness but maybe it's really
bad to be low in agreeableness if you're
really high in neuroticism or really low
in conscientiousness and so you could
see that that that tilt towards less
empathy which might make you capable for
example of enforcing rules might be
um
well as I said might be extraordinarily
useful even Pro socially under some
circumstances but very pathological
under on under others
yeah there's a movement now I think to
question the absolute positivity of
empathy this fellow who loon from uh
Yale University I'm not sure if
if you haven't interviewed them yet you
should because he um he points out the
overuse of empathy or inappropriate use
of empathy like letting a stranger into
your door is a simple example but having
traits that
make you react overreact
say to Blood and Guts is going to
prevent you from being a surgeon you've
got to be able to get your your knife in
there and slice people up
and to some extent ignore them if uh
well up to a point if they're
complaining
right
um yeah so there are jobs in which
too much empathy is going to
um impede your ability to success
so he goes through a lot of examples
like that I suppose one of the first
things they do at boot camp is to
try to
impose certain kinds of motivations in
soldiers that are joining the Army
and make sure they understand that if
you don't
kill first they're going to kill you or
they're going to kill your buddies and
that should be the way you think when
you're you're in a war and if you don't
have that ability to reframe your normal
gentle personality then you're in the
wrong place right well and it's it's
clearly the case that people who are
very high in trade empathy so very high
in agreeableness they are easy to take
advantage of and they also tend to
become resentful and bitter at least
that's been my clinical observation
because it's very difficult for them to
stand up for themselves right and so you
need a certain amount of capacity for
aggression and then there's a there's an
interesting twist here too I don't know
I read a book a while back called
billion Wicked thoughts it's a very very
interesting book it was written by
Google engineers and one of the things
they did was analyze pornography use
between men and women and on and and
with billions of searches literally
and they found which is not surprising
that men preferred visual pornography
but females preferred
um literary pornography and they found
the classic
literary pornography plot
which was something like
um you know relatively Innocent but
undervalued and attractive but not so
obviously attractive young woman
stumbles across this sort of commanding
man who
has many women at his disposal and over
time despite his relatively high levels
of aggression he finds himself
attracted to this woman and then forms a
sexual relationship with her it's a
Beauty and the Beast plot essentially
but one of the things that's so
interesting about their analysis was
they they listed the top five
occupations or characters
for female sexual uh literature and they
were pirate
surgeon
billionaire vampire and pilot and so
those are all males who I would say are
marked by oh no not pilate werewolf
werewolf was the fifth one and so
I think it reflects to some degree this
conundrum that women have is because
women have to pick a man who has the
capacity for aggression enough of the
capacity for aggression to protect
himself and others and to move out into
the world against a fair bit of
opposition but who's also simultaneously
empathic or perhaps conscientious enough
to to be caring and share and you can
imagine that's a real knife edge right
because you need a bit of a monster in
your man let's say to keep the real
monsters away but you don't want so much
monster so that a relationship is
impossible and so then you could also
imagine that there's overshoot on both
sides of that Target so that some men
become too aggressive but can appear
attractive in the short term because
they have the confidence associated with
that and some men become too agreeable
and so they look easy to get along with
and so forth but they can't put
themselves forward and stand up for
themselves and so be another explanation
for the potential emergence of say
sadism and psychopathy is that there's
this narrow Target for especially for
men to hit doesn't account for female
psychopathy but for men to hit and it's
easy to overshoot in either direction
and there's going to be variability in
women's Choice as well
[Music]
the current administration's New Year's
goals are to tax spend and turn a blind
eye to inflation if this is at odds with
your goals if you are tired of the
government playing games with your
savings and your retirement plans then
you need to get in touch with the
experts at Birch gold today for over 5
000 years goldas withstood inflation
geopolitical turmoil and stock market
crashes with help from the experts at
Birch gold you can own gold and attack
sheltered retirement account Birch gold
makes it easy to convert an IRA or 401K
into an IRA in Precious Metals just text
Jordan to 989898 to claim your free info
kit on gold and then talk to one of
their precious metals Specialists Birch
gold will hold your hand through the
entire process text Jordan to 989898 and
protect yourself with gold today with an
A plus rating with the Better Business
Bureau thousands of happy customers and
countless five-star reviews you can
trust Birch gold to help protect your
savings text Jordan to
989898 today
[Music]
yeah one of the issues that underlies
my work in connection with Clinical
Psychology which you're the expert in
and I'm not
I try to stick to so-called subclinical
levels in other words
student bodies or workers these are
people who are managing to get along in
everyday society and they're available
in large numbers so you can take surveys
and uh
and try to tease apart the various
aspects of the dark side but I do not
I'm very reticent to venture to the
clinical side
and I think that's been a source of
criticism from of me from clinical
psychologists that I'm touching on areas
that really belong to them
and do not belong to me because I'm not
a clinician
so when we get into
sexual sadism and criminal sadism which
in a sense was all people associated
with sadism up until recently it was the
only way that people thought about it
and interesting interplays between
sadism and masochism why would it be to
some extent the same people
who are into both
uh I can I can ask these questions and
surveys but I hesitate to to try to be
an expert and accept what people are
saying well it's it's not as if it's not
as if the clinicians have been any more
careful than the personality theorists
in elucidating the actual nature of
their diagnostic categories right I mean
one of the reasons I'm a clinician and a
personality psychologist I mean one of
the reasons I find your work interesting
and compelling is because you do the
psychometrics properly and that's not
always obviously the case with clinical
diagnostic categories because they're
basically holdovers from the psychiatric
Enterprise and they weren't derived they
weren't extracted out of a primarily
statistical model and so on the downside
for the clinical psychologist it's not
obvious at all that we have our nosology
our diagnostic category system straight
and so I'm and and I mean I I'm not
saying that in a cynically critical
manner because it's actually a very
difficult thing to do right but it seems
to me that your work isn't unfairly
um what a poaching on the grounds of
clinical psychologists because somebody
has to do the basic psychometric work
it's like well what are the basic
categories of
let's say predatory and parasitical
Behavior now you can imagine that
there's a place where that becomes
clinically extreme and has to be dealt
with in another manner but there's
absolutely no reason not to look at it
subclinical manifestations as well one
of the reasons I wanted to talk to you
now is because I've been reading a
number of papers I I got really
interested in this idea that
virtualization
enables
well maybe psychopathy but maybe more
broadly dark tetrad Behavior you know
because one of the open questions is if
you're dealing with someone who has
these personality proclivities that you
described Machiavellian narcissistic
Psychopathic and sadistic
they obviously lack
um a Freudian superego in some sense
they can't regulate their own behavior
in a social manner left to their own
devices they will exploit and hurt and
so then you might say well what keeps
people like that in check and one of the
answers to that would be well the same
thing that keeps the rest of us in check
which is mechanisms built into the
neurobiology of our face-to-face contact
like we know that if you put people in a
car they'll be Ruder to each other
to someone in another car than they
would be
face to face on the street like there's
a lot of
direct inhibition built into our social
interactions that keeps psychopathy and
narcissism under control but then what
you see online is that all of that
disappears eh and I don't think that
there's any real price to be paid for
dark tetrad Behavior online especially
if it's Anonymous and that's made me
think more recently especially as our
culture tears itself apart as a
consequence of the battle between
extremes on the political Spectrum it's
made me wonder how much of that's
actually driven by the virtualized
enabling of psychopathy and narcissism
because you know it's always a problem
one of the things people might not
understand who are watching this is the
incredibly
high cost that biological organisms bear
in relationship to parasitical Behavior
so that'd be Associated let's say with
psychopathy there is good evidence
although I wouldn't say it's canonical
that the reason that sex itself evolved
was so that we could stay ahead of the
parasites if you just clone yourself
the parasites can chase your genome down
the generations but if you mix your
genes then the parasites have to
adapt rapidly to keep up you can stay
ahead of them and so
sex itself was driven by parasitical
behavior and so what that indicates is
that the presence of parasites as well
as Predators throughout our entire
biological history has presented a
canonical threat to our very
civilization and now
if it's true that virtualization enables
the Psychopaths and the narcissists then
it seems to me that that produces a
cardinal threat once again and there's
been a Spate of research more recently
using the dark tetrad measures to
investigate such things as narcissistic
self-promotion on on Tick Tock and
Instagram but also trolling in online
bullying and so maybe you could tell us
a little bit about what's been found on
that front
yeah well again you covered a lot of
ground there but the central point I
have to totally agree on
and we got into a specific aspect
where sadism plays a big role and that
is the trolling online
you get to say anything you want without
repercussions if you said that to the
person's face
you'd be in trouble for various reasons
legal the physical reasons but we we
tried to delve into asking these people
who engage in trolling online
why do you do it and we ended up with
the title of our paper trolls just want
to have fun because that seemed to be
the most common motivation it's just fun
poking at people you find a website
where people are all happy and uh
enjoying it I don't know a gardening
group and you mess with them
and that seems to be a lot of fun for
certain individuals we correlated an
interest in doing that with the dark
tetrad measures and sadism stood out as
the best predictor of liking to mess
with happy people
so having the internet as has put us
into trouble
politics is a an obvious example but
just being nasty to your fellow humans
is now
uh
yeah it's a sport it's a hobby it's it's
a Pastime and these people tend to spend
a lot of their time
engaged in various uh
in
similar activities the right well we
know that one percent of the criminals
commit 65 percent of the crimes and so
it's a prito burrito distribution like
almost every other form of let's say
creative production and so it's also the
case in all probability that a very
large proportion of the pathological
online Behavior comes from a relatively
small proportion of you know committed
dark tetrad types and given that they're
not only not inhibited by the normal
mechanisms of social discourse they're
also rewarded because they get a
tremendous amount of attention and I
would say I think it's reasonable to
also point out that that attention is
monetized in some sense and expanded by
the internal operations of social media
networks themselves it's certainly not
the case that the trolls pay a price for
being provocative in fact I think
there's good reason to think that
they're their attempts are more likely
to be multiplied rather than inhibited
and that that could be depending on the
degree to which we virtualize I mean
that could pose a real a signal threat
to our
to the Integrity of our peaceful
political
uh uh Arrangements let's say
yeah it's out of hand and it's hard to
track down individual contributors to
malevolence online but uh
one could blame it on media polarization
and just the the need to attract
customers turns out that people don't
like moderate
uh media sources they won't turn to that
channel
they'll turn to a channel where they can
feel warm and toasty
because the other people on that channel
agree with them on everything so that I
don't get to hear other points of view
and many years ago perhaps you and I
were there at the time of Walter
Cronkite and there were a few
um there were a few corporations online
two or three that everybody watched and
they
we're more or less down the middle
if those were put online now nobody
would watch people want to watch the
extreme version of their own politics
and that's unfortunate development and
Technology
yeah well there is some you know there
are some exceptions to that I would say
I mean I've had a lot of success
let's say with long-form Dialogue on
YouTube and other people have done the
same thing and you know inviting people
like you to have discussions the last 90
minutes or so and that's a pretty
comprehensive discussion and it rewards
a long-term light uh attention span but
it's definitely the case that there are
selective pressures in relationship to
attention to gather as much impulsive
attention as possible and of course
there's a profit motive behind that
often because if you can gather people's
attention you can advertise to them and
I'm not saying this cynically I I'm just
trying to observe the way the system is
working if you can gather people's
attention by whatever means you can
almost instantly monetize that and so we
also have this new technological problem
which is that we have technologies that
can really reward
impulsive information gathering and
simultaneously monetize it and that
means that that's fertile territory for
the Psychopaths and the narcissists and
the machiavellians and the sadists to
exploit and I think they're actually I
think there's enough of that
to actually undermine public trust in
general because it it makes
like my actual life is way less
contentious than my online life
you know they're not even in the same
universe in some sense is that sense of
polarization
it it's really very difficult to tell
now in the modern world how much of that
is a mere consequence and a mere
appearance of virtualization and how
much it actually reflects some
fundamental disquiet I mean I know they
Loop but we have no way of really
knowing and if it is true that
virtualization enables psychopathy then
that's a that's a real that's a real
conundrum that's a real tough nut to
crack
yeah and it's scary in a way to think
that
in a way you're getting closer to what
people are really like uh in an
anonymous responses we know that from
questionnaire work
that the more Anonymous responses the
the less desirable the answers that you
get from people are
but it's yeah it does sound very cynical
to think that
the nasty stuff you see online is really
The Human Condition
well I'm more optimistic about that you
know because of this Pareto distribution
phenomena I think I'm pessimistic
because it looks like
a very small number of Bad actors can
cause way more trouble than we would
have thought right and that's a
pessimistic idea is that yeah it's only
three percent who are dark tetrad types
or maybe five percent it depends where
you put the cutoffs let's say and that
means 95 percent of people are going
about their business in a decent manner
but and that's a very positive thing but
the downside is yeah but that five
percent can cause a god-awful amount of
trouble I mean I talked to Andy no
um about antifa you know and I'll tell
you how that came about I I was working
with a group of Democrats in the U.S to
to help pull the Democrat Party towards
the center and I did that for a number
of years and uh
there was one topic that we used to come
to a fair bit of disagreement about and
that was the reality of antifa and the
Democrats I was working with were
absolutely convinced of the absolute
reality of 4chan and the right-wing
conspiratorial groups but they didn't
believe that there was really any such
thing as antifa and I thought well these
were smart people and I thought why the
hell did they believe that and they said
well there's always been race riots in
the United States and the degree to
which antifa is organized is blown out
of proportion and they're not really a
formal organization and and so on and so
forth and I thought well that's
interesting because some of that's true
but you could say the same thing about
the hypothetical right-wing
conspiratorial groups so but then I
talked to Andy Noe who's done more to
cover antifa than any other journalist
and I said to him um Andy how many
antifa sells let's say do you think are
operating in the United States and he
thought farhani thought well maybe 40. I
said well how many full-time equivalent
employees so to speak do you think each
of those cells have
and he thought well maybe 20.
and so if that estimate is
vaguely accurate that's 800 people in
the entire United States has a
population of 320 million it's really
one person in 400 000 right and that's
sort of statistically
equivalent to zero
so you know that's why the Democrats can
say well that antifa doesn't even really
exist but the counter argument is yeah
there aren't very many of them but a
small number of people who have these
dark tetrad motivations and I'm not
saying that's unique to antifa by the
way I'm talking more about the riotous
troublemakers who love to dance in the
street you know
um
if it's only one in four hundred
thousand people that's just an
indication of how much trouble someone
who has no internal sense of restraint
can make manifest if they're free of all
external social controls
yeah I don't have too much to say about
that but
I would like to talk a bit about
extreme niches that you brought up
before
and where these people end up if they
have the proclivities for one of the
dark tetrad
the proclivity for
narcissists would be in the realm of
politics
because they want attention and they get
it whether it's positive or negative
it seems to work for them
the machiavellians I think are among the
most interesting though
stock markets Financial organizations
and uh
although we just saw this fellow Santos
who made up his uh CV to get elected
right Long Island uh an example of a
politician who's both
narcissistic because you have to to be a
politician
and a Machiavellian but Bernie Madoff
was the classic he was the most popular
guy in his building on Fifth Avenue
big smile on his face all the time happy
go lucky and stealing money from
thousands of people
far more money that he could ever use
as a billionaire he wanted more billions
but that's a niche in which
machiavellianism will
help you get to the top you have to
manipulate and hide and do it relatively
low-key unlike the narcissist
so uh I think we already talked about
the psychopath and the uh the sadist but
it does
uh play out in the occupations that one
chooses uh to to suit your your niche
yeah well you you can also see there
that that makes the issue of leadership
a complicated one right because we know
that the Big Five personality profile of
narcissists is something like high
extroversion and low agreeableness
and so and so you you can see there that
someone who's low in agreeableness is
going to put their Viewpoint forward in
a pretty aggressive Manner and someone
who's extroverted is going to be
enthusiastic and captivating and so and
you need those
you can understand that there might be
situations that cry out for genuine
leadership where both being extroverted
and being disagreeable would be an
advantage and you know that might be a
situation where you hope like hell that
your extroverted disagreeable politician
is also extremely high in
conscientiousness so that even though
they might like attention and even
though they might be less empathic than
that their relative lack of empathy
would pose a certain risk that their
proclivity to abide by a set of ethical
principles would override that but then
you get people who fake that
conscientiousness and fake competence
which is partly what Psychopaths do when
they entrap women is
to to fake that confidence and then to
look like you're abiding by the rules
when you're just being Machiavellian and
narcissistic and manipulative
yeah that's fascinating to think about
different combinations
and uh of the big five but also of the
dark the dark tetrad I wrote a paper on
Steve Jobs for example some time ago
it helps to be a genius of course but if
you're a full narcissist who believes
you have the right idea and the entire
world is wrong about it
everyone disagreed with them
and he was right
right well that's a good example of that
hyper successful Niche right so so
that's a good that's a very interesting
case because you're going to get the odd
situation where someone is narcissistic
and Hyper intelligent and correct in
which case their their narcissism and
their callousness in some sense is
absolutely what's needed to bring forth
that whole set of ideas well in fact he
was fired by his own company
after having proved himself to be a
genius and changing the world in so many
ways
his own company said he was too
obnoxious
so they let him go
eventually the company kind of faded out
they had to bring him back but right how
can how can you be so super successful
and fired by your own team
uh classic case well you know I knew
people who I know people who worked with
jobs and one of the things they told me
was that he was he was unerring in his
ability to Cull
you know so he had a very high eye for
quality but he he also didn't let
empathy stop him from killing projects
he thought were counterproductive and
that's a tough one right because you can
imagine you can't say that if you're
running a company and you're attempting
to produce something that keeping a
faltering project going because you
don't want to hurt the feelings of the
employees by bringing to a halt is a
moral virtue it's not a moral virtue and
the reason for that as far as I can tell
is that you're just prolonging the agony
and awaiting the inevitable death right
so you have the evidence in some sense
at hand but you're unwilling to
draw the appropriate conclusions from it
and there is that same necessity for
discrimination and and elimination
that might also be driving the capacity
as you pointed out earlier of a surgeon
to go into someone's body and to get rid
of the cancer right in independent of
the fact that they have to deal with the
blood and the gore and the and the pain
and the fear and all of that and they
can't let that stop them
yeah agree totally with with everything
you just said
I wanted to get back to the
psychometrics just for a moment
um I know you worked in depth uh on the
big five and separated into aspects and
broke it down
and that's
in a way
characterizes a certain approach to
personality I call
the distinction lumpers and splitters
and that's to some extent then the pro
and con of my Approach
trying to tease apart or parse the the
dark side
is an approach that
just made sense to to us given the
overlap in literatures that I mentioned
earlier
but there's also a tendency
you mentioned earlier the the evaluative
sense to lump together good traits with
other good traits the so-called Halal
has its correspondent devil effect and
that is if you learn something bad about
somebody
you naturally assume it's hard not to to
think that they have all the other bad
traits too
and so that
there's a lot of uh in a way competitors
out there working on the dark side
who are trying to lump it together and
call it the the D Factor the dark Factor
so it's collapse them all into one and
you can array people on this one
dimension that never appealed to me I
think uh it's a lot more interesting to
break things into their components
but how intercorrelated how
intercorrelated are the four scales on
average and and does it can you extract
that can you can you extract out a
single Factor how much of the variance
does that factor account for
um yeah excellent question
we started off with correlations between
0.3 and 0.5 with the dark Triad and that
is
definitely all positive they're never
negative correlations
but uh to some people that was too high
especially 0.5 or above
means well why don't you just add them
together and call it something else yeah
and that's what the the so-called
d-factor people have done
it just seems such a silly Simplicity to
me that you could look at your fellow
human beings and call them
uh place them at a certain
position on this single Darkness
when there's so many ways of being dark
there might be one way of being a good
person but there's many ways of being
dark is is the approach that we took
well technically what you'd want to show
is that
your multiple measures interestingly
predict different outcomes and
differentially and you talked a little
bit about occupational choice I mean
that rubber hits the road basically by
having you demonstrate that your your
multiplicity of categories adds
predictive power to in some interesting
way to the solution of some complex
problem I mean it certainly seems to me
to be useful at least in principle to
distinguish something like sadism and
positive pleasure taken in the suffering
from others from Mere impulsivity you
know even though both of those can be
problematic I'd also like to suggest
something else to uh to the listeners
we might ask ourselves why in some
fundamental sense are these behaviors
these dark tetrad behaviors properly
regarded as pathological and I I think
especially given that you could make the
case that they have some reproductive
benefits at least compared to certain
other strategies but I think the issue
here you tell me what you think about
this it it has to do and this is like a
biology of Ethics in some sense it has
to do with iterability and so there's
this famous study set of studies by
Jacques panksep where he analyzed the
the play behavior of juvenile male rats
and what he showed was that if you put
two juvenile rats together and one
outweighs the other by ten percent
there's about a 90 probability that the
bigger rat can pin the smaller rat
and so if you just do that once the
conclusion you would draw if you were a
like a zero-sum biologist and someone
interested in dominance is you'd say
well the bigger stronger meaner
dark tetrad rat can win the competition
and therefore has elevated himself in
the hierarchy of dominance and is more
likely to reproduce successfully but
panccept being a bit of a genius
knew that rats lived in Social
communities and had iterated
interactions with one another
and so they you don't play with another
rat if you're a young rat only once you
play with them repeatedly and so
pancakes paired them repeatedly and what
he showed was the second time you put
the rats together the little rat had to
invite the big rat to play and mammals
have a characteristic strategy for play
invitation you can see that in dogs they
sort of Bounce and so did kids and so do
sheep like it's extremely widespread
among mammals
um
and and so the little rat had to ask the
big rat to play and the big rat would
dating to play but if you paired them
together repeatedly if the big rat
didn't let the little rat win at least
30 percent of the time
the little rat would stop playing and so
I thought it was an unbelievably
profound set of studies because it
indicated that there was an emergent
ethos that was intrinsic to repeated
trades you know and you know the
economic games where you you take two
people and you say look I'm I'm gonna
give you a hundred dollars and you can
offer some fraction of that to your
partner but if he refuses neither of you
get anything you play that around the
world and people average out at about 50
percent and it's the case that even poor
people who need the money are very
likely to reject a sharing offer that
isn't something approximating 50 percent
and you might say well that's
preposterous because why not just take
the money and leave and the answer is
something like yeah but there's an ethos
of fair play that emerges out of
repeated interactions and your goal
isn't to win a single game it's to win a
set of iterated games and the problem
with the psychopathic perspective and
the impulsive perspective is that
even the Psychopaths themselves
sacrificed their own future as well as
other people to the immediate
gratification of their desires and
that's just not a very sophisticated
strategy right why win once when you
could hypothetically win you know 50
percent of the time 100 times
and so we I think we we can get close to
a technical description in this sense of
what constitutes pathological Behavior
right it's pathological behavior is the
proclivity to gain in the short term but
lose in the medium to long run
yeah I've thought about this in terms of
the
the winner in animal groups the alpha
male so to speak is usually the meanest
nastiest of the group
and uh in human groups the meanestness
doesn't rise to the top you have to have
allies
so Alliance building is an important
component of success in human societies
not so much it is apparently in
chimpanzees but it's really important
you get to the Top If you can link
associate
and get friends get uh allies to help
you in getting to the top well friends
friends DeWall in his work has has
demonstrated quite clearly that the the
stable alpha males like there are alpha
males who can make it to the top who are
sort of dark tetrat and chimps right
they'll use just Brute Force but they
tend to meet pretty damn violent ends
pretty young
whereas the stable Alphas sometimes are
smaller males who Allied themselves with
powerful females but who are also more
reciprocal often in their interactions
so more fair Traders let's say than any
other individual in the group and so
dewal has done this lovely job of
relating uh let's say Cooperative
leadership to social stability and
length of rain and so the psychopathic
chimp might do better than the the chimp
who is only withdrawing and never
interacts at all
but the psychopathic chimp who relies on
aggression doesn't do nearly as well as
the reciprocal chimp who builds a
network of allies
and so and I I well I really like the
Wall's work for that reason you know
because it's often the fact that people
who presume that our hierarchies are
based on PowerPoint to say chimpanzees
and say no it's power that sustains
dominance it's like no power can provide
you with dominance in the short run but
it's not it's not an optimized long-term
strategy and so it's reasonable to view
it in some sense as a form of deviant
pathology especially in its more extreme
forms because it's a self-defeating game
we'll be back in one moment first we
wanted to give you a sneak peek at
Jordan's new series Exodus
so the Hebrews created history as we
know it
don't get away with anything and so you
might think you can bend the fabric of
reality and that you can treat people
instrumentally and that you can bow to
the Tyrant and violate your conscience
without cost you will pay the piper it's
going to call you out of that slavery
into Freedom even if that pulls you into
the desert
[Music]
something else going on here that is far
more Cosmic and deeper than what you can
imagine the highest
[Music]
precisely as that spirit that allies
itself with the cause of Freedom against
tyranny I want villains to get punished
but do you want the villains to learn
before they have to pay the ultimate
price that's such a Christian question
yeah this notion of
getting people on your side or
developing allies
course is essential for politicians it's
the one with the most voters the one
with the most compatriots supporting
them money-wise and otherwise who gets
to the top we apart from Machiavelli
we've also been drawing on
Sun Tzu the the famous Art of War writer
from China and as in many cases the
Chinese got there before the West did
but he talked about building alliances
and indeed
we've tried to
invoke that in our measures and it turns
out to be a key for manipulation the
Machiavellian
is well aware and you can see that in
some of the items on the max scale of
getting people on your side is essential
to getting ahead
it might might be the key the key
element to it not standing up and
leading but getting people to
um
to to be persuaded to your side
right so the Machiavellian then in that
situation the Machiavellian I would say
is mimicking reciprocal sociability
right because if you and I form a
relationship that's going to be stable
over time
it's going to be something like let's
say a 60 60 exchange you'll contribute
half and all contribute half
but the reason I represented that is 60
or maybe 75 percent is because if you
and I engage in reciprocal honest
training the sub the sum total of our
activity will exceed the sum of our
individual activities right we can do
more together than we could do a part
and so there's there's all sorts of
sense to be made for the establishment
of these honest durable and reciprocal
relationships but what that also means
is that if most people establish those
then people who only act as if they're
establishing them can capitalize on that
just like the narcissists and the
Psychopaths with their false confidence
can mimic competence and fool well
there's good literature evidence for
example that the dark tetrad types
broadly speaking are particularly good
if they're male at fooling young women
you know as women get older they're
better to they get better at separating
out the narcissists from the competent
men but initially because the
narcissists have this confidence that is
a marker of competence even though not
an you know an invariable marker they
can easily be fooled and so
that opens up the landscape of
cooperatives to exploitation by a small
minority of of predators and parasites
so so what else have you found out on
the social media front and and and where
do you think the interesting research is
let's let's where's the interesting
research going on in that area and do
you have any sense of what sort of
constraints need to be put in place in
online uh forums to keep the Psychopaths
under control like I've come out
recently against anonymity
because my sense I've read tens of
thousands of of online comments my sense
is that
a radical proportion of anonymous
posters have these dark tetrad traits
and I know there's a research literature
that actually indicates that as well and
so
I've been attacked for that because
people think that you know their right
to free speech also involves this right
to Anonymous posting and I can
understand that argument but the problem
is it it opens up it does seem to me to
open up the landscape to the predatory
parasite types and that's a real problem
so have you thought about like what have
you seen that you regard as a credible
deterrence if any on the on the virtual
side to the
dominance and and proliferation of of
dark tetrad Behavior
really no uh Solutions have come to mind
uh
it's it seems out of control when you go
to a website
and ask for comments
which is really trying to get feedback
to whatever is on your site
it seems
I think somebody calculated it takes
about 10 comments before someone says oh
yeah [__] you
yeah well so you're talking about this
this proclivity of of open online
discourse to turn into a Kind Of Swarm
and characterized by the the presence of
well I really do think it heats up the
whole political environment because you
know you alluded to earlier the fact
that there's lots of things people won't
say in person pardon me for legal
reasons but also partly for physical
reasons and both the legal and the
physical constraints are removed in the
virtualized world and that does seem to
produce an unbelievable
uh flowering of pathological commentary
and then I really do believe that that
makes everyone think the world and the
people in it are a lot worse than they
really are because it magnifies the
effect of these this tiny minority
especially the sadists you know it's
been so interesting to me to watch your
concept of dark Triad expand to take
into account that positive delight and
suffering because I don't think you can
really understand like radical Evil by
merely making uh making reference to
narcissism and and instrumental
valianism and even psychopathy you need
pleasure and suffering to really add
that last
you know nail into the coffin so to
speak
yeah one interesting uh goal we had was
to try to find the female sadists
on on all of on all four of these
components
with males score higher and
even in sadism we figured there's the
Mean Girls phenomenon we all have this
sense that women can be nasty in
different ways perhaps and so we tried
to uh develop items especially with my
colleague Aaron Buckles at the
University of Winnipeg she's working on
this and so is Tracy viencore at Ottawa
U they are looking at relational
aggression so women may use different
ways not physical or less physical
and uh gossiping for example uh
spreading spreading lies
um there are a few others that that
exploit the verbal abilities of women
and allow them to be nasty to people
that they think
deserve it and so those people are
working
actively on trying to get a measure of
sadism that would apply to women even
more than to men because I wonder if
that I wonder if that would involve
pleasure in exclusion
you know I mean it's it's definitely the
case that well if you use time out on a
child one of the reasons it works is
because it's technically a punishment it
produces something akin to pain but the
pain is essentially social it's it's
involuntary social isolation
and so if you exclude someone which is
what the mean girl types do right that's
their their primary this reputation
destruction and exclusion seems to be
their particular bailiwick you see that
with female anti-social behavior and
there is a pain associated with that
which is the pain of social rejection
and it's not trivial like it's very very
hard on people and so you could imagine
that positive Delight in observing the
fruits of social exclusion might be a
canonical characteristic of female
sadism
yeah that's a good idea to focus on that
because we know that male friendships
are more based on common interests
female friendships
are more of a bonding an emotional
bonding and therefore the exclusion
tactic would be much more devastating
for women
good idea
yeah yeah well it so I I studied the
development of male and female
anti-social behavior for a long time you
know and it's pretty obvious that
female anti-social types by and large
are less
sort of impulsively criminal than males
are which is why there aren't very many
females in jail but that ability to
denigrate and to gossip and to destroy
reputation is much more characteristic
of the female anti-social types and they
can be they can be really really good at
it and the frightening thing about that
too to some degree is that you know male
aggression of the physical sort doesn't
scale worth a damn on social media
because you can't use physical
aggression on social media but the
female pattern of anti-social Behavior
which is reputation destruction and
social exclusion man that scale's like a
charm on social media especially because
of what you described as the negative
halo effect you know and I really
noticed this I should be very resistant
to that negative halo effect when I pick
out my guests for my podcast eh because
I have had a lot of guests on my podcast
and now and then I talk to people who've
been uh mobbed excluded or had their
reputation damaged for one reason or
another
you know and even when I know perfectly
well that there's a high probability
that they've been lied about and that
they've been the target of this kind of
malicious gossip there's still a strong
proclivity in me that I have to fight to
overcome not to assume something like
well where there's smoke there's fire
you know and you don't have to Sully
someone's reputation much before you
raise the cost that other people need to
Bear to interact with them right I mean
we all have
in principle thousands of people we
could interact with
and so we're always looking for a reason
in some sense not to interact with
people and if a terrible Rumor Has
spread about someone well
the cost to me to avoiding that person
can be very very low but the cost to
that person if everyone avoids them is
unbelievably High
yeah most people
care about how a person treats them
specifically and they can overlook
rumors often because the other person
has treated them personally well so
that's that's a dynamic that works in
the other direction to to cut down on
the negative effect of rumors and uh
Gossip that sort of thing right assume
assuming that you actually have that
personal relationship you know one of
the things I've also seen as a
consequence of virtualization you know
if I'm if I'm working with people
virtually
and so we haven't established that kind
of personal relationship
if any issue comes up that's negative it
seems to have a larger effect than it
would if we had established uh you know
a long-term more personal face-to-face
interaction so as long as things are
going smoothly the virtual interaction
seems to go well but it's really easy
for anything negative to be magnified
and I think it's partly because you
don't have that buffer that you just
described which is maybe something like
the evidence of repeated interactions
face to face evidence of repeated acts
of kindness and so forth so that you
have that as a data body to offset the
you know the negative event against
yeah right on on all of those points I I
did want to
talk a little bit about
your your work on the big five with
respect to
the challenges to the big five as well
as the challenges to my work
kind of dovetail in an interesting way
and that is although the big five has
become the consensus for the broad
personality traits
so big fibers mostly assume that they've
covered it all because they're working
at such a high level
and people like me who are working from
time to time on individual traits that
would be farther down the hierarchy of
of the personality space now it turns
out that you can add at least one other
dimension to the big five and that's
been contributed by Ashton and Lee to to
Canadian researchers who have to some
extent eaten away at the popularity of
the big five by talking about the big
six or the hexacool
and what they've added is a dimension
called the
humility honesty humility which is a
great choice I thought but but it turns
out that that extra Dimension they added
subsumes all of the dark traits that
I've been working on oh oh I didn't know
that I wanted one to ask you that oh
when was that discovered
that has been
coming to light over the last five years
and so so I've certainly turned to
favoring the big six instead of the big
five and in some of my recent work in
terms of we know the personality space
is rather
amorphous and
uh you can rotate dimensions in multiple
ways to suit your fancy but this one
suits me because it shows where the dark
traits fall with right back to a
comprehensive personality space they all
fall together under this this one
dimension honesty humility
and so I really appreciated the uh
do you think that's because Ashton Lee
is it because they included in some
sense some of the originally excluded
words from their statistical samples of
adjectives the ones that are more
evaluative because I mean your phrases
or sentences are really quite evaluative
on the moral Dimension and so they
wouldn't have been considered in the
initial Big Five Corpus and then honesty
humility seems to be kind of in the
middle of that right because it's
obviously better morally to be honest
and humble than to be dishonest and
arrogant and so you're sneaking there or
stepping into the domain of of ethical
categorization but I wanted to ask you
actually like if you if you throw your
your sentences into a sentence level Big
Five like the notion model
I think what you just said is that the
individual sentences will line up the
dark tried or dark tetrad sentences will
line up on a dimension that's the
opposite side of honesty humility
do they break out across other factors
as well or
like how much dishonesty humility
subsume the the dark Triad on the
negative side
well it's pretty much uh the the whole
thing is there under honesty humility
they do have a couple of other
negative traits in there so there's a
slightly broader which
suggests maybe we could add a couple of
other negative traits to our Pantheon of
of aversive personality is that's one
direction to look in anyway uh it's
interesting what you say about the
yeah pulling out the negative traits
which cattell did many years ago and
tell again and a few others have pursued
that and indeed I think that's that's
there if one looks hard enough that the
work of earlier personality researchers
the big seven was available in the 70s
and one of those looked like
um looked like a dark personality Factor
so one that would didn't make an
interesting paper to to track that issue
interesting you put that together has
anybody done a large-scale
compilation of the dark tetrad items
with the hexical model like on thousands
and thousands of people have you done
that yet
others have done that yeah
yeah it's there
the uh the German sentences have always
been known as good psychometricians and
uh they they've shown in a number of
large-scale studies that both in German
and in English they can work as well in
English
have uh show that clear pattern oh yeah
okay well that's really worthwhile
knowing
um so what what forms of behavior do you
think are most powerfully predicted
by the dark tetrad questionnaires
like the sorts of things that people
might encounter in their day-to-day life
if we can bring this to life for people
we're focusing on a set of personality
personality attributes what are you
likely to experience if you encounter
someone who is characterized by a
plethora of these
of these uh characteristics
well that's been it's kind of a summary
of our goals in my laboratory and that
is we want to develop practical
measurement instruments
one can find a lot of interesting things
in
Freud's Thanatos and Young's
shadow shadow but you're not going to be
able to ask people about those in a job
interview so what we want are measures
that can be applied to Ordinary People
whether they're
um
job selection you want certain kinds of
people and sometimes you want a little
bit of the dark side
sometimes not uh
even in these romantic websites where
you're pairing up people you want to
know a little bit about the potential
partners
the
the dark side is starting to prove
useful there
um
so practical measures that you can
present to large groups or diagnose
people is is what we've been aiming for
and so the psychometrics have been
the most important thing getting it
right so we we tried in in California on
that front this might be something you'd
be interested in methodologically so I
put together a behavioral predictive
battery that was
very short cognitive analysis which is
basically the Ravens Progressive
matrices revised we we made our own
matrices but we got a good Central
measure of General cognitive ability and
then a good fake proof measure of the
big five and we we made it fake proof by
forcing people to choose between
positive descriptors or between negative
descriptors we lost a degree of freedom
but we made the test robust against
social self-presentation I did that with
Jacob Hirsch and then so I used those
tests to predict entrepreneurial success
in thousands of people in Silicon Valley
I was working with a man a day oresi who
ran an Institute called the founder
Institute which was the biggest early
stage Tech incubator in the world I
think he started 5 000 companies
something like that and we can predict
entrepreneurial ability pretty well
basically with General cognitive ability
trait openness and a bit of a positive
tilt for age and but this is what was
happening in classes say he'd get 50
people together
to at a very early stage in the
development of their business ideas
and now and then he'd get a couple of
bad apples in the group and that would
just destroy the class and then he was
spending all his time attending to the
troublemakers so he came back to us and
he said look we're doing a pretty good
job of finding people who are qualified
but we can't keep out the troublemakers
and I thought well could we do that
psychometrically so this might be
something interesting to consider in
relationship to the dark Triad and the
personality disorders so you know
there's there is a central factor in
personality disorders if you if you turn
the personality disorder items in the
DSM into questionnaire items
you can extract out a single factor and
one of the best predictors of failure to
respond to clinical intervention on the
personality disorder side is
sheer number of personality disorder
symptoms so it's kind of just like a
severity index you know so what we did
was we we turned the DSM personality
disorder items into questions
and then we administered them to a very
large number of people
and then we we pulled out a central
Factor and then we found the items in
the personality disorder questionnaire
that best predicted the central tendency
and those that predicted it the least
and then we forced people to choose
between them they both sound bad they
both sound like pathological attributes
but one is much more clearly a marker of
the central proclivity than the other
and then we did the same thing with
Wink's narcissism scale
and so then we were able to identify
people who had this narcissistic
proclivity and a personality disorder
proclivity and we'd screen those people
out if they scored more than 95th
percentile and that cut the incidence of
troublemaking the classes dramatically
so the reason I'm bringing this up is
because
utilizing it'd be very interesting to
see and maybe you guys have already done
this and so this is also a question on
that front is like
a lot of the personality disorder
symptoms look to me like their
manifestations of the more severe end of
the dark tetrad traits and it would be
lovely to see this psychometric
Enterprise enter the domain of
psychopathological prediction and maybe
the doorway through that is the honesty
humility
Dimension differentiated out into the
you know more anti-social pathologies in
the manner that you've done it it sounds
like that's an interesting Bridge into
the technically clinical world
well that's been a dynamic in the
development of
our understanding of the link between
normal and clinical traits I again I
don't want to step on the on the toes of
clinicians but I understand the movement
toward trying to make all clinical
disorders
uh dimensional
and that's been a real clash between the
traditional clinicians who feel that
you've got schizophrenia or you don't
got schizophrenia as opposed to having a
dimension that represents a particular
disorder and placing people on it
and so I understand why people would
some clinicians who are have a
psychometric proclivity are a little bit
offended at me trying to come up with
labels that sound like clinical
disorders but aren't really because all
of the people I study are doing okay and
you alluded to this earlier but there's
very little
uh maladjustment among any of those four
dark personalities you you can't get
them to correlate very strongly with
especially with the general neuroticism
or feeling of distress they're not
distressed
whether they're high or low there's
there's there's very little relation
there right that's an interesting case
of the of the absence of distress being
a marker for pathology because that is
the problem with being a psychopath in
some real sense is you do impulsive
things
and they hurt you in the long run which
is why you end up in prison or with no
friends or as a catastrophic failure by
the age of 40 but none of that's being
marked by psychological distress along
the way
so you're you're opaque to the to the
trouble that your own pathology is
causing and that means you're not
getting error signals when you should so
you're not depressed or anxious but
you're also whistling in the dark as you
walk towards a cliff so not helpful
yeah the very clever a clever study that
you outlined there sometimes one gets a
sample or an opportunity to to study a
certain group and that's that's what
carries one's research but if you think
about it that's been a difficulty in
doing Dark Side research you've got to
validate these measures so you've got to
have hard criteria especially Behavior
you can rely on the judgments of others
to some extent but hard visible
recordable behavior is really the most
persuasive kind of Criterion but think
about sadism how are you going to show
that in the laboratory that was a real
challenge to us but but in a way it was
fun developing measures
that can be used can get by these very
restrictive
IRB boards that look through your work
and say no you can't do that you can't
do this
and so
so with this notion of bug killing which
I I guess I have to attribute that to
Dan Jones who came up with the notion of
getting people to think that they're
crunching bugs
and a coffee grinder and again such
variants some people loved it we we
tried to anthropomorphize the bugs by
giving them names so there was a little
wee container that had names like Ike
and muffin cute little names but they
had to take these bugs put them into the
cruncher pressed down and hear the
what sounded like bug parts flying apart
it was actually just
coffee beans but again like the Milgram
study they thought they were doing it
and once
some of the subjects I give it got any
more that was fun
other people were so horrified to think
about
the whole idea they just ran out of the
lab when we described what we wanted
them to do
lovely to have variants like that when
you're studying uh
something uh sensitive like sadism we
also use voodoo dolls I'm not sure if
you're familiar with that research
giving subjects uh acutely oh yeah and
saying think of the person that you
really dislike
now we're going to leave you alone for
five minutes and you're welcome to take
this this set of pins and stick them
into the doll to represent the degree to
which you hate them
and again lots of variants there we come
back after five minutes and some of
these dolls are full of pins
and that tends to correlate with um I
think this particular study was actually
showing the uh the dark tetrad measures
in comparison to questionnaire measures
of psychoticism which is
in a sense answered the question that
you often
pose yourself with your listening to a
horrible crime described
on television and you wonder
this is such a horrible crime was the
person crazy right or it was a person
nasty and that has legal consequences
doesn't it
crazy you're not guilty you're you're
just nasty you can go away for some time
for doing nasty stuff and we found
actually that both
contributed to the extent that you can
measure psychoticism
with a question questionnaire measures
debatable we found that independently
the dark tetrad and psychoticism
predicted the number of pins that you
stuck in this uh this uh sorry little
doll that you were given
so Dale you've been delving into the
dark side of human behavior for a long
time and you know you alluded to the
fact or the possibility of a certain
pessimism that emerged as a consequence
of your observation that sometimes
Anonymous responses are actually more
revealing and Anonymous behavior on the
net has produced quite the uptick in
pathological Behavior but what what has
been what has been the consequence for
you personally in focusing so intensely
on this dark area of human
proclivity and uh
and
well let's start with that
oh yes and then the other thing was how
do you distinguish let's say personally
and scientifically
between the ethical issue with regard to
the dark tetrad Behavior and the
biological motivations right because
your work does skirt that line right so
you can think about psychopathy as an
Adaptive mating strategy in some sense
on the scientific front but then when
you think about it ethically and
personally it falls into the category of
the kind of clearly reprehensible
behavior that should get people locked
up so hey what has this done to your
view of human nature and B how do you
thread the needle of scientific
evaluation versus moral evaluation
well for me it started in
in an undergraduate course where I
learned about machiavellianism and went
to work with Richard Christie so in a
sense I was there from the beginning how
what the causal Direction was I'm not
sure at that point but it did do a lot
of other work on on self-enhancement Etc
other researchers in my department like
to study happy people and
I I didn't find them as interesting as
the as the dark side and certainly I
could give a rationale that we're more
concerned with the behavior of the dark
side than we are with what happy people
can do to us maybe they they could bore
us at times but they're not going to be
a danger to us so studying the dark side
is more important arguably and there is
a light
Triad now where people have put together
some positive traits and kind of
followed up on the notion of the dark
Tetra a dark Triad and
said why don't we look at the positive
side and see who
who is who gives a desirable motivations
for their behavior
I studied social desirability for a long
time and it never really came together
for me because
you you develop a social desirability
scale well it's partly true and it's
partly yeah phony and and that's a
terrible confounding because do you want
to hire the person who scores high on
social desirability or the person who
scores low is probably right right right
I found that very frustrating work as
well I tried to develop scales of
self-deception and self-presentation and
it was I ran into I think very much the
same problem it's it's well first of all
it's not obvious that it's an
independent Dimension right because it
seems to be quite affected by
agreeableness but it's also not as you
said it's not obvious what the desirable
outcome actually is like do you want the
person who tries to look make themselves
look better than they are during a job
interview and the answer is well maybe
you do want them because at least they
came to the interview and tried and you
know you could say well it's fake but on
the other hand well putting your best
foot forward it isn't just fake it's
also a step in the right direction and
so separating those out is
extraordinarily difficult it's also
difficult to separate it out from such
things as extroversion and trait
optimism and yeah it was a real morass I
know you did a lot of work on that for a
long time eh
I don't know if you've heard of
Integrity tests but yeah I raised a real
Paradox because Integrity tests in the
sense of the opposite rationale to
design social desirability tests they
ask people who are being hired
by big companies uh
have you stolen from an employer
and a variety of other things that would
cause the
company a problem if they hired you but
they take it at face value with
Integrity tests if you leave those
answers on a social desirability test
then researchers would often toss you
out because
um
no one because you're lying you're lying
or hypothetically yeah yeah well I
didn't I didn't know that the the
Integrity tests seemed to be valid
predictors only to the degree that they
marked something like conscientiousness
I never saw any compelling evidence that
they really got farther than a good
conscientiousness measure so you know
some people have argued that the reason
why both of them can work is that social
desirability skills are usually used on
college students who have a higher
cognitive abilities if you're hiring
cashiers or someone who's doing
um muscle work for your company then
it's it's a little more straightforward
and to some extent they've got some
clever methods like saying how much
money do you think the typical employee
steals from the employer
and it's kind of a projective test right
built into it in a way to the extent
that someone says oh yeah people steal a
lot
they're they're uh
they're indicting themselves
right right right they're indicating
what they regard as normative so look
we're out of time here
um
unfortunately uh so thank you is there
anything else we're going to turn over
to the Daily wire plus platform here I'm
going to talk to Dr Dale paulus for
another half an hour about the course of
the development of his interest in
Psychology and in these dark Tetra
traits
um and I'd like to thank him very much
for
coming to talk to or for agreeing to
talk to me today and for sharing what he
knows with everybody who's listening uh
the dark tetrad research is extremely
interesting um if you're interested in
Psychology this concentration on the
accurate psychometric evaluation of of
it of essentially immoral and
counterproductive Behavior viewed from a
social perspective is very important
part of the psychometric Enterprise and
I think it's one of the
domains of modern psychology that are
reliable and valid and that might bear
genuine fruit as they unfold just like
the big five has so it's been really
good to talk to you for everyone uh
watching and listening today thank you
very much for your time and attention as
always and uh is there anything else you
want to bring to the attention of people
before we
we move over to the other interview
no I just appreciate that you really
covered all of the important issues uh
the full breath thanks for that
oh my pleasure and like I said I'm I'm
very pleased that we had the opportunity
to talk today all right everyone
watching and listening thank you very
much and thanks again Dr paulos and and
uh ciao to everyone
hello everyone I would encourage you to
continue listening to my conversation
with my guest on dailywireplus.com